Effectuation: a Real Example
  1
Make sure you’ve read the previous post of this series.

So, let’s back to the donut franchise business. Imagine that you’re the main protagonist. With effectual reasoning, now you don’t want to start the franchise business. It never came across your mind—or it did, but you didn’t take it seriously.

But, you know your grandma have a very delicious donut recipe. You have a vivid memory about your teenage days, cooking and experimenting with her.

One day, you had a guest from other cities. She complained about how she couldn’t find any class A donut restaurant near your home. Her complaint suddenly reminded you to your grandma recipe. So, you asked her to join you cooking donut in your kitchen. Turned out, your friend love it so much and even said it was one of the best donuts she ate in her life. You’re quite surprised, knowing she had tasted a lot of premium donuts.

At that point, you knew that someone credible said you have a premium donut recipe. Thankfully, you have effectual reasoning. You also knew, with your job as an interior designer, you have a lot of friends from almost every office in your local area. The latter day, you cooked a lot of donuts, and sent it as a sample to your friends, asking how delicious it is for their company lunch. You knew that employees usually got bored fast with their lunch menu, and there were no premium donut in your area. 60% of the companies immediately ordered your donut bi-weekly.

You have served them for two months. The repetitive order was a new mean for you. You scanned your list of friends, searching for the potential new means you can gather. Gotcha! One of your high-school friends has two successful restaurant brands. You said, “Hm, she has might want to buy my recipe. Well, that’s one of my imaginary ends.”

You continued the scanning again and found your elementary school friend who was a manager of a big supermarket. Somehow you read his Linkedin status last month, you knew he was searching for entrepreneurship opportunity, but couldn’t leave his job and start from scratch. Thinking about him, makes you realize a fact about yourself: unlike him, you hate to manage the day-to-day operation of a business. You love cooking and experimenting a delicious and beauty donut better. “That’s a mean also. A fact about myself,” you said it to yourself.

The scanning process triggered you to have a new imaginary end: “how about I turn this into a restaurant, with the investment and advisory from my high-school friend, and the operational leadership skill from my elementary school friend?”

Of course, that’s not the only one imaginary end. But you kinda liked it and wanted to validate the means to that end. Again, you cooked some donuts, brought it to them, told them your imaginary end—and the contribution you’ll commit to give for that imaginary end. If they’re interested, you ask them, how far they wanted to commit to this imaginary end. Life experience taught you that everyone can say sweet words, but it all means nothing without commitment. Remember, a mean means a ‘condition’, or a ‘fact’.

Luckily, they instantly agree to commit. They were not your close friends. But they thought you don’t have any bad track records at school back then. Your initiative to turn the local companies around you to commit to having your donut was also impressive for them. Above all, you have what each of them needs: a restaurant investment opportunity and a more challenging—but still well paid—job.

Will the restaurant be a franchise business, like the MBA assignment on the previous post? Effectuation will answer like this, “If you have enough means to that imaginary franchise end, it might be”.

 

A Radically Different Imaginary End
Now, let’s imagine an alternate universe to our story.

What if, the protagonist wasn’t an interior designer and don’t have much access to local companies surround?

What if, the protagonist had different means? 1) She was a teacher, 2) and a quite famous blogger on DIY (do-it-yourself) topic.

With those different means, the protagonist chose to make a special blog about his/her special donut recipe, give a brand name on it. After couple of weeks he/she found that the traction is quite good.

Because of the good traction (read: new mean!), the protagonist chose to recorded a pro video tutorial on how to cook it. Surprisingly it turned into a viral movement for the mother’s day.

Different imaginary end? Yes.

More money than the imaginary successful restaurant? Seems no.

Also using Effectual reasoning? Yes.

But still entrepreneurial? Yes. See the question above.

 

The Experimental, Iterative, Committed Mindset
With those stories, I hope we can see Effectuation as a mindset, which has these attributes:

 

Experimental
If the protagonist couldn’t imagine delivering the lunch, after realizing that she/he had good recipe and friends in companies nearby, the story might end faster, or different.

The core of it is imagination. With imagination, the effectual reasoning triggers you to explore limitless possibilities. Experimental implies it can be done fast. You work with given means. If you don’t have enough means to make the imaginary end you choose become reality, then you’re stuck—hence, you do nothing, you’re not experimental. Choose the most potentially beneficial and feasible imaginary end.

 

Iterative
If the protagonist just continuing the lunch delivery business, there might not be any restaurant venture at all—obviously. Interestingly, if the protagonist directly goes to her/his investor friend without any proven lunch delivery business, the probability of getting funding is decreasing.

You can see causal reasoning as one-way trip. The goal is clear and given. When it was fulfilled, chase another new given goal. In effectual reasoning, if you’re seeing it as one-way trip, you’ll just get a framework for realistic dreaming. If you see it as multiple trips—turning an imaginary end to be real creates new mean(s) and a new effectual reasoning, you’ll get a framework of building a new big enterprise.

 

Committed
The companies that willing to pay for new donut lunch; the investment contracts; and the partnership deals; they are all means for some imaginary ends—for an imaginary successful venture. 

Before I learn deeply about Effectuation, I saw mean just as a fixed internal condition: things you own, abilities you master, relationships you have, etc. Then I realize it also includes external conditions: others commitment. Yes, you have less control about it, so it’s a quite-hard-to-get mean. But it’s not impossible at all. This is one of the new radical thinkings I got from Effectuation: you can see your first customers as your partners of your ‘enterprise’, the one who took a commitment. Well, now I fully understand why textbook says a customer is also a stakeholder. Want a clear or recent example? Think about Kickstarter backers.

 

 A Mindset for A Culture
You might have accepted Effectuation as a mindset, a way of thinking and seeing things by an individual. Now, we can move to explore the communal side of Effectuation mindset: an entrepreneurship culture.

Let’s keep that our next and last post of this series.